learners/setup.md, before:

---
title: Setup
---

## Software Setup

This course may be completed using *either* the Python programming language **or** the R statistical package.
Please use the tool that you prefer.

[Python](https://python.org) is a popular language for research computing, and great for general-purpose
programming as well. We will be using some of the inbuilt functionality of Python 3.

The [R programming language](https://cran.rstudio.com/) is a statistical package that is designed for data exploration, visualization,
and data analysis. To interact with R, the most popular tool is
[RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

TODO online editors

:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Windows

#### Text editor

The Notepad text editor is installed by default on Windows. [Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/) is a more powerful, open source editor that has a syntax highlighting feature.

#### Python


There is a guide for [using Python on Windows](https://docs.python.org/3/using/windows.html) in the
Python documentation. [Python Releases for Windows](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/) are
available at [Python.org](https://python.org).

#### R

[Download R for Windows.](https://cran.rstudio.com/bin/windows/) We will use base R and some libraries
that offer additional functionality required for this course.

::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### MacOS

#### Text editor

TextEdit is installed by default on Mac OS.

#### Python

Please read the guide on [using Python on a Mac](https://docs.python.org/3/using/mac.html) in 
the Python documentation.

#### R

[Download R for macOS](https://cran.rstudio.com/bin/macosx/) and [RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

::::::::::::::::::::::::


:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Linux

#### Text editor

GNOME Text Editor is the default app on Ubuntu since version 22.10. On other distributions,
other text editors may be available, such as Gedit or Kate.

#### Python

Please read the guide on [using Python on Unix platforms](https://docs.python.org/3/using/unix.html) in 
the Python documentation.

#### R

[Download R for Linux](https://cran.rstudio.com/) and [RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

::::::::::::::::::::::::

Commit message:

Add link to example repo

learners/setup.md, after:

---
title: Setup
---

## Sample code

There is an example project contained in a code repository that is hosted on GitHub at [Joe-Heffer-Shef/oddsong](https://github.com/Joe-Heffer-Shef/oddsong).
As we proceed through the course, we'll create a collection of scripts similar to this.
Please feel free to refer to this example to help you engage with the course contents.

## Software Setup

This course may be completed using *either* the Python programming language **or** the R statistical package.
Please use the tool that you prefer.

[Python](https://python.org) is a popular language for research computing, and great for general-purpose
programming as well. We will be using some of the inbuilt functionality of Python 3.

The [R programming language](https://cran.rstudio.com/) is a statistical package that is designed for data exploration, visualization,
and data analysis. To interact with R, the most popular tool is
[RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

TODO online editors

:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Windows

#### Text editor

The Notepad text editor is installed by default on Windows. [Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/) is a more powerful, open source editor that has a syntax highlighting feature.

#### Python


There is a guide for [using Python on Windows](https://docs.python.org/3/using/windows.html) in the
Python documentation. [Python Releases for Windows](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/) are
available at [Python.org](https://python.org).

#### R

[Download R for Windows.](https://cran.rstudio.com/bin/windows/) We will use base R and some libraries
that offer additional functionality required for this course.

::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### MacOS

#### Text editor

TextEdit is installed by default on Mac OS.

#### Python

Please read the guide on [using Python on a Mac](https://docs.python.org/3/using/mac.html) in 
the Python documentation.

#### R

[Download R for macOS](https://cran.rstudio.com/bin/macosx/) and [RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

::::::::::::::::::::::::


:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Linux

#### Text editor

GNOME Text Editor is the default app on Ubuntu since version 22.10. On other distributions,
other text editors may be available, such as Gedit or Kate.

#### Python

Please read the guide on [using Python on Unix platforms](https://docs.python.org/3/using/unix.html) in 
the Python documentation.

#### R

[Download R for Linux](https://cran.rstudio.com/) and [RStudio Desktop](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/).

::::::::::::::::::::::::
